Welcome to Lab 0 of CS320. This entire lab is designed to introduce you to the Linux operating system,
some of its tools, and to help you become accustomed to the lab environment. You shall be using Linux for
all practical work in CS320. Although this lab is not assessed, it is possibly the most crucial lab of the course
as far as building your understanding of Linux is concerned. Please take it seriously: work carefully, and think
critically about what you are doing at each step.
Linux may be unfamiliar territory for you. Even if you already have some Linux experience, you should come
into the computer labs and familiarize yourself with the Linux environment before your scheduled lab session.
In particular, you should treat the first section of this lab sheet as preparation work: be sure to get through
all of it before you arrive for class.
This lab is only the beginning, however, as you will continue to learn about Linux and its tools over the
semester. Here is some helpful, general advice:
• Take the time to experiment with the work that you do. Ask yourself questions as you go along. Play with
the commands and tools that you meet.
• When you run into difficulties, try to work through them on your own or with a fellow student before
seeking the help of your tutor. Any help that you eventually receive will be of greater value if you have
already thoroughly thought about the problem you are tackling.
We hope you enjoy the lab and, more generally, the unit!
1 Preparation: The CS320 lab environment
This part of the lab will help you get started in your Linux work environment1 and introduce you to the
fundamental tasks that you’ll need to be able to carry out while doing the unit. You should treat this section as
preparation work: try to get through as much of it as possible before you arrive at your scheduled lab.
1.1 Orientation
For our work in Linux, we use the Bash shell via the desktop terminal program.2 Bash is an example of a shell,
which is a program that acts as your text-based interface to the operating system. It takes your typed commands
as input and displays text in response. This program is already running, and waiting for you, when you first
start using Linux; you don’t need to do anything to start it.
Open up a terminal in your Linux desktop environment (look under “Accessories” in the “Applications” menu
on the task panel). You should see the $ prompt of the Bash shell as it awaits your command.
Spend a minute or so experimenting. Try pressing Return; what happens? What if you enter some spaces
(then Return)? What if you enter some random text? Try the commands pwd and ls.
Files in Linux are organised into directories. These are arranged in a tree: every directory has one parent
directory, and may have one or more subdirectories.
3
At any given time, as you interact with Linux via Bash, you have a “current location” within this directory
hierarchy. This is known as your current directory or working directory. You can find this out using the command
pwd, for print working directory.
1
If you already have Linux installed on a laptop that you can bring to class, you’re welcome to work within that environment.
However, CS320 teaching staff are under no obligation to assist you with any problems that arise through the use of your own
computer for classwork
2Although the GUI interface would work just as well, treat this as an exercise in getting to know the basic commands and
behaviour of Bash — an extremely powerful programming tool in its own right. Also, many programs are run from the terminal,
including compilers, interpreters, and powerful data-processing tools. Learning to work in the terminal efficiently is essenti